### True and False Wajahe

The Wajahe have two main official social classes - the True and False Wajahe. This distinction arises from an earlier, pre-agricultural lifestyle, where [horses](Horse) were paramount in society - those who were unable to ride a horse by age 15 were seen as slovenly or disabled, and were declared False People and made into slaves. Though the practice of slavery eventually ended, this coming of age ritual remained with the increasing prominence of agriculture. Being unable to ride a horse now simply restricted an individual from certain privileges in the clan, and forced them into agricultural labor and into being foot soldiers when levied. As these individuals were typically not rich enough to afford an education in teaching their children horse-riding, the children of False Wajahe remained False Wajahe, while the children of True Wajahe were given every aid possible to ensure they passed this test and became True Wajahe themselves. Though social mobility still existed in some small numbers, in both directions, for the most part the social classes had solidified. In some places, such as [[Whiterun Clan]], wealth even became an integral part of this distinction, allowing citizens who failed the test to simply pay and take it again - which allowed newly rich merchants to elevate their social standing at the cost of a hefty fine paid into the state's coffers.

The privileges accorded to True Wajahe include:
- **Land ownership within city limits** - Though False Wajahe can own agricultural land, they are barred from owning land within city limits. This also results in most artisans being either employees of True Wajahe businesses, or directly renting land for use.
- **Officer posts** - While False Wajahe can in theory be promoted all the way to [[Exarch]], in practice, this rarely happens. True Wajahe are guaranteed an officer position from the start (unless they serve in the cavalry, which most do rather than take their officer position in the Infantry or Archers)
- **[[Clan Elders]]** - False Wajahe cannot be Clan Elders (or the Chief, though this doesn't matter in any case)
- **Favorability under the law** - True Wajahe generally have lower fines or sentences for offenses than True Wajahe, especially in situations where the two classes interact.

### Treatment of Merchants in the Lakes
Merchants among the Wajahe can be broadly analyzed across 3 different regions, where their wealth, treatment, and political influence broadly follow regional trends. See the map below for the three regions.

###### The Southwest
In the southwest, trade is one of the major lifelines of Wajahe society. Historically, the [Nle](Nla%20Clan) and [Ksehen](Ksehen%20Clan) clans dominated this region, and under their influence, an astounding volume of trade was conducted, both overland and across the river, with the [Riverine](The%20Riverine%20Culture) peoples to the south. Under these states, merchants grew to wealth and prominence, and became the only group separate from the warriors to have a significant say over the functions of the state. In fact, merchants participated and helped fund the expansions of the Nle and Ksehen clans into the south, to capture the confluences of the river and establish tributary states in the south to control the most lucrative trade route in the known world. This elevated status of merchants continues into today, and merchants are typically hr̩ə (True Wajahe) as they can afford to educate their children in horse-riding. This is especially the case in [ʈ͡ʂʷɥɔwɔ](Chyowo%20Clan), the successor state to the Nle clan, where merchants are often even able to become clan elders - the position of ʈ͡ʂʷɥɔwɔ on the mouth of the lakes (right as it connects into the great river) makes it an exceptionally important city for trade, and as a result, its governance is somewhat removed from the stricter stratocracies to the east.

The southwest tends to be a more stable region, which combined with the prosperity of trade, means that this region tends to produce more powerful states. Ksehen, which led the [ɥnehɨʈ͡ʂɨk](Ksehen%20Clan#The%20First%20Dynasty), was from this region, as was [hisit͡se](Hisitse%20Clan), a major player during both the First and Second intermediate periods. The direction of their trade also tends to protect it from raids from other clans.

The southwestern states are ʈ͡ʂʷɥɔwɔ, [hkʂɨt](Hkshit%20Clan.md), and hisit͡se.

###### The North
In the north, trade is the least important of all the areas. This region was historically the slowest to sedenterize and urbanize, and the lack of any significant powers to the north has resulted in a state that undervalues trade, and treats merchants as a second rate profession, even if their status as horse riders typically makes them hr̩ə. In times of war especially, they are often conscripted and forced to fight - merchants like to make an "important trade voyage" right when tensions seem to be simmering. This, combined with a region vulnerable to raids, has resulted in a mercantile class that are all well-trained warriors - merchant caravans are known to attack each other, with the loser slain and their goods seized.

The northern states are [ɥəʐəɥ](Yerzhay%20Clan), [tsɛpʷwɛ](Tsepwe%20Clan), and [ʋtetʷwɛ](Vtetwe%20(State).md)

###### The East
In the east, trade was of growing importance, with the emergence of [hʷɔʂhʷuɥ](Imyes) urbanization and the 5th Dynasty of [hʷwɨɥtrən](Whiterun%20Clan), the importance of trade (and therefore the status of merchants) had steadily risen - which remained in place after [[Jağefj]] displacement of the hʷɔʂhʷuɥ. hʷwɨɥtrən exports quarried stones from the hills it levels, which are sent both west and east on dedicated and protected caravans. In addition, a new trade route running through the [wzøt͡sɥøw](Wzetsyew) emerged, across which hʷwɨɥtrən is a main city - this trade route prove to be extremely lucrative and is a primary reason why hʷwɨɥtrən was able to resist (and even expand) during the plague which brought collapse and destruction elsewhere. hʷwɨɥtrən is unique in that the state provides protection to its merchants. Merchants are always hʷt͡sɥøt͡sk (False Wajahe) because of their refusal to fight (and so have no political influence), but are treated with status and respect nonetheless. This is a distinction from the Slave Merchants of hʷwɨɥtrən, which are always True Wajahe. They are also the only group across the lakes that owns their own horses for transport - these are personally owned and not associated with any clan, which enables them to make longer and riskier voyages on a regular basis.