At the beginning of time, there was only the ocean. This ocean, endlessly dark, formed both the great waters of the endless sea, and the eternal expanse of the night sky. It was [ōsaeuais](Osaeuais.md), a solitary and shy being. 

Within ōsaeuais, there was the capacity for great anger and contempt. At a moment when anger raged, a great burst of energy was released - from this arose [[Aiokkais]], the first god. They were created from a honed and studied rage, and thus were created with a perfect body, and with the will and desire to explore their powers and to create, such that they may dominate their creations.

Aiokkais swam to the surface of the ocean. Between the ocean and the night sky, both aspects of ōsaeuais, Aiokkais found a great expanse, into which they could create without fear of ōsaeuais’ interference. Here, they made 3 children - [[Eafais]], [[Muloffais]], and [[Iflaukais]]. Eafais was given domain over the sky, the border, where they were to prevent meddling from the great darkness. Muloffais was given dominion over the expanse itself, which they filled with wind and all manner of energy. Iflaukais was given dominion over the core of Aiokkais’ space, where they first created Dirt and Fire.

Over a long period of time, the 4 gods created the Earth. Iflaukais provided the dirt and the fire, to build the Earth. Muloffais provided the wind, to move the sections of the Earth into place. Eafais hid this from ōsaeuais. And Aiokkais directed the creation, such that it would match their desires. Into this Earth, Iflaukais added grass and water, trees and mountains, flowers and dust - but it was empty, lifeless.

Into this crucible, each of the 4 gods once again contributed, to create beings that could inhabit their creation. Aiokkais created the [Souls](The%20Afterlife) - both greater and lesser, for the People and the Animals - that these creations would not be lifeless. Eafais shaped and warped the sky, such that it covers the earth, putting the creation together. Iflaukais constructed the bodies for each soul to inhabit. Muloffais once again used the wind to move the souls and the bodies into place. And thus was life created. All living beings gained the favor and gifts of a god - Muloffais granted the birds flight, Eafais granted the fish the strength to swim, Iflaukais granted the bears the knowing of the hunt - but above all, Aiokkais’ granted to one group and one group alone, the People, a greater soul - thus that they too could create. And once they had created, Aiokkais could claim dominion over over them, and look upon the world in all his tyrannical glory.

Yet all this life was shrouded in the endless darkness cast down by ōsaeuais, and while the eyes of the Gods could peer through the darkness, the eyes of the living things could see only so far as the flame cast its light, and so all living beings huddled by Iflaukais’ hearth, too scared to claim the world that was theirs to spread across.

And so Aiokkais took the flame that his child had created with his magic, and cast it around himself, shining its light with great intensity. He took the wind that his child had created with his magic, and harnessed it to fly up and far, that all could see his radiance. He took the sky that his child had fashioned out of ōsaeuais, and used the wind to fly across it, such that all life may see his light, and go about their days.

But the great light awakened a deep rage in ōsaeuais. ōsaeuais was a being of darkness, and a solitary creature. They finally took notice of these gods, and their activities, and above all the great light that stung and burned right in their face. The retaliation was swift and severe - the destruction of these upstart gods and the subsumption of their creation into the endless ocean, may yet return everything to the peaceful solitude of darkness. Hundreds more of her droplets coalesced, and out charged a host of demons, each made in the mockery of a living being. They sought to extinguish the light, and return the world to darkness.

Aiokkais knew that the 4 gods could not defeat such a host alone. And so, they turned to the people, who had already spread across the land and chosen among themselves chieftans. And to each chieftain, Aiokkais gave his blessing, that they also become equal to his own children, should they fight by his side.

A great battle in the skies was fought, and corpses on both sides lay strewn in such numbers, that when the people looked above, they saw a thick, solid ring of them across the sky. But every demon lay slain, while Aiokkais, his children, and a handful of his new gods, still gave breath.

Ōsaeuais knew they could fight again, but they knew also that again they would lose, for the people below only grew more and more numerous. And so it created two great platforms in the sky, one further away to project its own voice from, and one closer for Aiokkais to speak from. And a peace was agreed, that for one half of the day, Aiokkais’ light would be seen by all life, who could rejoice in its presence. And for one half of the day, Aiokkais would extinguish those flames, such that ōsaeuais may know a measure of peace. Aiokkais in his duty became the Sun, while ōsaeuais let stay the two platforms, shaped into the moons, such that any war in the heavens again could be avoided. Far into the future, only the corpses of those slain in the sky remained, as a reminder of that great and ancient war.