One would imagine that, with peace agreed upon with [Ōsaeuais](Osaeuais.md), the gods and their favored humans would live in harmony, if not peace, for war had taught them much and gave them much to desire. Yet this was not so, and the fracturing of the heavenly courts would come out of [[Aiokkais]]’ willingness to use his power, and use it to make gods out of only those men that worshipped him, and not those that truly were powerful and willful, and deserving of it, by leading their clans to war, or by destroying their enemies underfoot.

His children grew disgusted with this favoritism, and assembled to inform their birthparent about their grievances. Aiokkais accepted that they were correct but refused to change his ways, that they were his children and he was the birthparent, and that they must accept his decisions. Secretly, they were much chastised and corrected their actions, but outwardly, they maintained a face of outrage and demanded submission from their children.

The three children were not of a mind to take such treatment, and as children often do, sought a way to humiliate their birthparent. For this purpose, they sought to create a new God, one that would defeat their birthparent and take the position at the top of the Gods. But this god would not do it through strength of arms, but instead, through wisdom, tactical thinking, and craftsmanship.

This new god, [[Mowyva]], was crafted by the three children. [Eafáis](Eafais.md) gave unto them the clear skies, such that they be clear of mind and thinking. [[Muloffais]] gave unto them the power of the wind, that had shaped the mountains, and so could be used to shape the world in their image. [[Iflaukais]] gave unto them life, and allowed that they could themselves give it to their creations. Thus had the three children schemed, and thus they had created a being more powerful alone than the three were together.

Mowyva immediately became a favored deity of the people, as they forged the strongest weapons, molded the most shapely clay, and weaved the strongest saddle. Aiokkais was outraged that their position as the favored god had been usurped, especially among those living along the shores of the Lakes. Mowyva further provoked the ire of Aiokkais, and challenged them to a duel; normally, Aiokkais would reject this on principle, being the greatest of the gods, but now they were so incensed they accepted this agreement to fight on the field of battle.

Now, every child knows that the sword is the strongest tool. And in this regard, Mowyva was not even a child, for they did not comprehend the power of Aiokkais, greatest of the gods. The two rode towards each other on horses, and in an instant, Mowyva lay dead on the floor, their talent amounting to nothing before the heavenly lance of Aiokkais. But Aiokkais was a merciful god who loved their creations and all who dared to be brave and courageous, and in this scene of their victory, understood that this was no fault of Mowyva, but rather one of their children, who had conspired to put this new god in such a situation. And so, Aiokkais brought Mowyva back to life.

But regarding their children, Aiokkais was disgusted. The three were suitably chastised when approaching their birthparent. First, he beat them for their insolence, as a good parent would beat their child. The slap of Aiokkais was the lightning and its echoes became the thunder; so powerful was this beating that it is still seen and heard today in fragments. Then, Aiokkais in their rage decried that if they wished the rule of the earth and all life on it, they could have it, without any support from their birthparent. Aiokkais themself left for the heavens, and ceased to rule over the Gods. Of course, they still listened to the prayers of their human worshippers, and watched the chiefs of the Wajahe, such that one who had proven themselves in battle or leadership might become a god through Aiokkais’ blessing.

The seat of power was not left empty for long. The three children understood that should one try to claim it, the Wajahe would reject them, just as they had rejected their birthparent. So the favored god, Mowyva, took this seat for themselves. Many Wajahe continued to worship Aiokkais, especially those who were the chiefs of the clans, those who tended to the horses, and those who took up the lance and the bow in times of war. But many others began to worship Mowyva, especially those who were on the growing villages upon the lakes. There was an unspoken admiration between the two Gods after their battle, Mowyva respecting Aiokkais’ prowess on the field, and Aiokkais respecting the gifts Mowyva granted to the humans on the lake; as such, there is little concern about which deity a human prefers to worship within the clan, and it remains a matter of personal choice.

Aiokkais’, remaining the God of War and of rulership in general, maintains a claim to the throne he has only temporarily left. The people all hold a firm belief that, in a time to come, long in the future, Aiokkais will return and reclaim his right. When he is reestablished as a tyrant over the world, the problems and contentions of man will cease, and all will be placed under a righteous and tyrannical order. Every warrior looks upon this day with hope, but deep down, knows that it will not arrive within their lifetime.

##### Notes
- The [[Whiterun Clan]] typically hold to a slightly different version of this creation story: see [[Ezzhé#Reprisal of the Wajahic Creation Myth]]. 