Wajahe Philosophy emerges around 1650 KS, and was based largely on that of [[The Riverine Culture]], from whom the institution was adopted. The focus was similarly on the duties of a person and how they should conduct themselves in this world. This emerged into a separate school of philosophy, with some notable differences. At this point in time, the Wajahe world was unified in their approach to philosophy, and the different cities did not have their own schools that differ significantly.
- Companionship - there is a focus on companionship and communal organization. A farmer cannot sow or harvest a field alone, a [[Horse]]-herder cannot oversee an entire flock of 144, and a warrior cannot defeat the enemy without his [[Comitatus]]. Indeed, it is the responsibility of a farmer to seek assistance from his children and romantic/sexual partners, the responsibility of a horse-herd to make friends with those others that work on this herd, and the responsibility of a warrior to either join or lead a comitatus and not be separate from it.
- Control over emotions and urges - The Wajahe understand that the rivermen desire to control and suppress emotions and urges is a sign of weakness, and the reason they lose every battle. Rage is the tool of the warrior, that he may ignore pain when slaying his enemies or the enemies of his comitatus. Pride is the tool of the horse-herder, that he may keep his flock groomed and well-bred, that he may show it off and ensure that all know the quality of his horses, and that he may be beaten down by shame should he fail to deliver upon his prideful boasts. Lust is the tool of the farmer, that he may have many children to help till the land and harvest the crops.
  Warfare is a part of the natural order, for [[Aiokkais]] would not have given men the urge to fight and make war should he have thought this unnatural. Only those who refuse to fight, through will and not through ability, are denied a place in the world. These are the fools that believe all that the rivermen spout.