The **Hetsekyy Lineage** was a lineage of clan chiefs of [[Chyowo Clan]], who ruled as monarch of the clan, then as both monarch and [[Exarch]] of the clan, and later as Emperor and [[Archon]] (of the Whiterun of Chyowo) during the early years of the [12th Dynasty](Chyowo%20Clan#The%2012th%20Dynasty). It was founded by the Chief het͡sɛ, who did not identify or aspire to emulate any ancestor of his, leading to the Lineage as a whole being named for him (it is important to note that the lineage itself never used the term Hetsekky, nor considered themselves a consistent lineage of monarchs in such a manner).

### List of Monarchs / Emperors
The following list of monarchs are dated by their years in rule.
- het͡sɛ: 2532 - 2560 KS.
	- het͡sɛ began their reign at the age of 15. As a teenage chief in a period of great turmoil across the Wajahe (centered on the [[The Hisitse Civil Wars]]), they were inspired by the success of the [[Ihwtsrksiw]] to the east. They set out during their reign to emulate the Monarchial chiefs of that state. As a monarch, het͡sɛ was quite ineffectual - they lost much of their eastern territories in a revolt their authority and break of tradition, and were unable to conquer it despite trying numerous times. They would eventually die on one of these raids to an infected battle wound, and be succeeded by their child, zekɛk.
	  *See [[Hetse's War]]*
- zekɛk: 2560 - 2593 KS.
	- zekɛk began their reign in the middle of a war against [[Yerzhay Clan]], in one of their predecessors many attempts to reconquer their lost territory. They would immediately prove a significantly more competent military leader as they would defeat the Yerzhay armies and push the border further east, and also a competent diplomat as they were able to gain the assistance of [[Tsepwe Clan]] in this conflict. After establishing full control over the traditional territory of Chyowo Clan, they established a loose but lasting peace with Yerzhay. During this time, they paid tribute to Tsepwe Clan, the great power of his day. However, during the aftermath of the [[First Oracular War]] and Tsepwe's demand for formal subordination to maintain protection, zekɛk was able to negotiate for the entry of Chyowo and Yerzhay into confederation with Tsepwe on equal terms (and the elevation of [[Hkshit Clan]] and [[Hisitse Clan]] to a similar status) - effectively leveraging the threat of alignment with the [[Oraculate]]. They would die a few weeks before the start of the [[Second Oracular War]], never witnessing the ultimate failure and reformation of the confederation they were instrumental in creating. 
	  *See [[Zekek's War]] and [Wajahe 6th Dynasty](Tsepwe%20Clan#6th%20Dynasty)*
- 