A Wajahe person has 3 names - Given name, Matronymic, and Clan name.
- **Given name** - this is the name a child is given at birth by their birthparent. It is often a virtue that the birthparent hopes the child will embody in life, but it is not limited to such. 
- **Matronymic** - this is the name of the birthparent, followed by the matronymic ending. In the case of a famous dynasty, the matronymic might be a dynastic name taken from the original matron of the dynasty - for example, the [[Hetsekyy Lineage]] of [[Chyowo Clan]].
- **Clan name** - this is the name of the clan a person belongs to. In case a person is a part of a military structure, this is replaced by the given name of their direct ranking officer (except in the case of an Exarch). In [[Chyowo Clan]], during the rule of the [Hetsekyy Monarchy](Hetsekyy Lineage), the given name of the monarch marking a person's birth was used here instead.

When addressing a person in an extremely formal context, the Matronymic and Clan name are used. When addressing a person in any other context, with which one is unfamiliar, both the given name and the matronymic are used. When addressing a person one is familiar with, the given name alone is typically used. When addressing a sexual or romantic partner, a variety of nicknames can be used, and these nicknames are based on the matronymic. Finally, when a addressing a child, a parent will almost always use a nickname based on the given name - this may be a personal nickname, or one used for that child by all their parents.