During the 2680s KS, wary of the growing power and territory of the Sixth Dynasty to the south, the Vutétwénh Protectorate to the north, and the Confederation of Iron Hooves to the east, [[Jağefj Settlements|the citadel of Ofjonbof]] placed the sparsely populated lands to its west under its protection. These areas came to be referred to as being metaphorically "behind the walls of Ofjonbof" - or, in Jağefjāz (the Jağefj language), əm luluzjōsko Ofjonboforos. This metaphor in time came to be reanalyzed as a single word, əmluluzjōsko, meaning 'state' or 'polity.'

In terms of internal structure, Ofjonbof could be described as an oligarchic spin on the traditional Wajahe stratocratic republic. As in the traditional stratocratic republic, all military veterans - opfjōrovor, literally 'clan elders' - have a voice in government. However, for most, this amounts to merely having the right to participate in the General Assembly (Tjaksixans), only able to vote on policy proposed by the Council of Generals (Idzang Niğēz). As the name implies, membership in the Council was only open to retired generals. While theoretically all soldiers were eligible to become a general, in practice only those from specific families were given command, thus in turn, making membership in the Council effectively hereditary.

These families - collectively called the Rašinnsevāb, literally Honorable Families - were those who claimed (accurately or not) direct birth-parent descent from certain prominent individuals involved in the founding of the state, often members of the inaugural Council. As the Honorable Families grew in size, more high-prestige jobs were siloed off for their members, either officially (by making them general-only roles) or (more often) unofficially.

By the mid-2800s KS, the specific families that constitued the Rašinnsevāb had settled down, with nine families being predominant: these were the Houses of Esebalāb, Twārpfavešaz, Zoğjōšəv, Osotsūng, Litaj, Xotutsovos, Kəšījeke, Lakeslasjaš, and Nikezəsezzēr.

During the Cycle of Great Bloodshed - a period of military activity in the 2900s KS - Ofjonbof engaged in a series of border conflicts with the Aaśśadat Empire to its west. This resulted in the gain of two mining settlements for Ofjonbof, the westernmost of these later being reconquered by Aaśśadat. A larger amount of territory - mostly surrounding the Jağefj city of Urolonguğ - was seized during the collapse of the Vutétwénh Protectorate to the north. Ofjonbof was additionally granted an exclave, some distance to the south - a city which was renamed after its conquest to Latsazilaz - after it had been conquered from the Aaśśadat Empire by Chyowo and svrlkænsyɥ, but ownership could not be decided among the main claimants. There was some debate as to how it should be managed, with the ultimate conclusion being that it would be ruled by the House of Xotutsovos, as supervised by the Council of Generals. Local representation was not considered.

In the year 3011 KS, as part of [[Jağefj Religion|the formalization of the religion]], the city of Ofjonbof was renamed to Dwāššgwes; it will continue to be referred to as Ofjonbof in this document for clarity. Shortly thereafter, during the mid-3000s KS, a series of economic crises led to a period of instability, which saw the Honorable Families move the capital (and themselves) to the exclave of Latsazilaz (now known as Ladzazlaz), while Ofjonbof struggled with bandits. In an attempt to regain some measure of economic stability, Ofjonbof once again attempted to capture the Aaśśadat gold mines to its west; this time, with Chyowo assistance, the capture was successful. While this led to a general stabilization of the situation, and a period of urban renewal in Ofjonbof and Urolonguğ, the capital would remain at Latsazilaz. It what also during this time that the first public Jağefj law code - the List of Judgements - was promulgated.